♪
♪ I-D-E-A-S ♪
♪ Ideas ♪
>> NARRATOR: Kader Attia is one
of the most surprising and
provocative artists in the
world today.
His socially and politically
charged work employs a wide
range of mediums to address
global issues surrounding
immigration, colonisation and
cultural identity.
>> IWONA: He's a global citizen
and I think his work reflects
the coming together of the
Occidental and the Oriental.
>> CLEMENTINE: He's very
interested in analogical
thinking.
He allows the viewer to look at
two things and to create a
relationship between them.
>> HANS: I think Kader Attia's
work has a lot to do with
engaging in a global dialogue.
>> ELLEN: For him, I would say
art is a means to express
social, political, cultural
questions and they are never
just artistic questions.
>> ELLIOT: He's someone who
struggles.
He pushes himself to actually
capture what he feels is wrong.
>> These moments in which I
developed interest in art,
I think was when I thought
it might be possible to change
the world.
I think art has this ability,
and that's why most of my
artworks are very interested in
these notions of living
together, politics.
>> Politics underpins most of
Kader Attia work and his
installation, "Kasbah",
perfectly demonstrates the way
he playfully gets his audience
to consider issues of dominance
and exploitation.
>> In North African cities, the
slums are called Kasbah, it's
like very provisional cities
made of any material found in
the street.
>> He uses fragments of these
rooftops and, you know, brings
them into the gallery.
That's a way of bringing the
city into the museum space.
>> It's a huge semi-flat
expanse of corrugated iron and
old tires and bits of wood.
>> ELLEN: It would be easy to
make a critical work about
living conditions of those
people, but Kader somehow turns
it around and gives it beauty.
>> ELLIOT: When you see people
in their stiletto heels or their
clumpy trainers, sort of trying
to keep their balance as they go
across the roofs, one of the
very clear things that you're
doing and a bit lost, I'd say on
quite a large proportion of the
visitors, is that you're
trading on the heads of the
poor.
>> Born in France to Algerian
immigrants, Kader grew up both
Algiers and a largely North
African community on the
outskirts of Paris.
This duality would profoundly
influence his artistic outlook.
>> This has helped me become
very sensitive to issues of
people in between spaces:
physical, geographical or
intellectual.
>> After studying philosophy and
graphic design in Paris and
Barcelona, Kader spent two
years in the Congo to complete
his French National Service.
It was an experience that would
further shape his worldview.
>> From this I started to be
very interested by the problem
of colonization, this notion of
domination between one order of
things to another one, caught my
attention when I was living in
Congo.
>> Colonization would become an
important theme in Kader's
later work.
But upon his return to Paris,
he stumbled on a far more
personal subject for his first
major project.
>> KADER: I was walking in the
streets of Paris, I heard two
men talking each other in
Arabic, but talking like women.
And so I turned myself and I saw
two transgenders and was like,
"Wow, those are real people and
they are very brave."
They were refugees from Algeria
in a time where Algeria was
almost taken over by the
Islamists.
So to be a man dressed as a
woman was not only dangerous,
I mean, there were really
killed.
>> Gaining their confidence,
Kader was introduced to a whole
community of transgendered
North Africans and made them
the subject of a photographic
series that he exhibited as a
slideshow in his home.
>> ELLEN: It was less
documentary about this life than
making visible of dignity,
friendship, solidarity amongst
those people.
>> IWONA: They're somehow not
quite accepted in any society
and they live in often quite
impoverished circumstances.
But they themselves are always
glamourous, and he, I think,
loved the way that they'd
reinvented themselves against
the odds.
>> ELLIOT: There's a certain
beauty in those that are
wounded and really finding
themselves up against implacable
strength.
>> The way of like, a sort of
incarnation that you can be
transgression politically
without being in politics.
>> The work was a success and
was selected for the Venice
Biennale in 2003, catapulting
Kader into the heart of the art
world.
>> In the Venice Biennale it was
very well received and I was
very surprised because it was
not art for me, it was just we
saw the necessity of giving them
a voice and giving them a
visibility.
I never thought this could
interest sort of artistic
audience.
>> Drawing on his connections
with North Africa, French
Algerian activist, Kader Attia,
shifted his gaze from the
personal lives of immigrant
communities in France and began
to explore broader issues
surrounding colonization,
immigration and cultural
identity through a series of
thought provoking film and
installation work.
>> KADER: Oil and sugar are part
of our global economy and they
have been so much involved in
the unequal systems creating
poverty, creating domination,
repression, colonization.
We define the modern relation
with slavery as this
transformation of human person
into goods, into sugar.
Oil is much more problematic
and oil is definitely linked to
colonization.
So you have this sugar that is
becoming black, and then this
incredible moment of, "Oh,
my God.
This is it."
It starts to collapse.
>> ELLIOT: Kader uses his
colonial experience as a kind of
starting point for feelings of
exclusion or equality, in every
way.
>> In his first major
installation work, Kader
decided to tackle issues of
exclusion head on.
Set on a beach in the Canary
Islands, "Holy Land" was a
reaction to the plight of
refugees arriving by sea from
Africa.
>> I wanted to do something that
would work in the reality of an
ethical project.
I thought that when the refugees
come from the sea, they need to
see signs which indicate that
the earth in that direction,
you know?
So I decided to set up on the
beach a hundred mirrors facing
the sea.
So coming from the sea you would
have seen a line of glittering
light as a signal of "there is
something here."
The ocean on that part of the
globe, it's a cemetery.
That is the reason that I chose
shapes which looks like graves.
>> ELLEN: That's really
beautiful because on the one
hand it has a very manifests
political meaning, because you
look into them but you don't see
yourself, you see the reflected
landscape and light in the
mirrors themselves.
>> KADER: We think that what we
look at the mirror is real,
but it's not.
When people reach the beach they
expect something, but what they
will find also it's not what
they have dreamt about.
And that's why I call this
installation "Holy Land",
because for them it's a kind of
Holy Land but the reality, we
know it when we live in this
side of the model, it's not the
Holy Land.
>> He's someone who struggles.
He pushes himself to actually
capture...
...what he feels is wrong.
This is really at the heart of
the work, because the work is
about healing.
>> Sidestepping overtly
political issues, Kader's
installation, "Ghost", takes
the culturally charged image of
prayer in the Islamic world as
means to explore universal
themes of existence and
mortality.
>> KADER: "Ghost" is definitely
a sort of incarnation of the
fact that we come from nothing
and we go to nothing.
The confrontation that you have
with this work scares you a
little bit because it represents
death.
>> ELLEN: You approach this
installation from the back and
only when you see the figures
from the front you see it's not
solid matter sculptures, it's
only aluminum foil.
And it's very beautiful but it's
also scary at the same time
because the figure has no face.
>> KADER: I started to do the
first ghost wrapping my mother
with aluminum foil because I was
looking at her praying.
After I cast the body, I
discovered that it was extremely
fascinating to see that the void
inside this sculptor was even
more important than the skin.
>> ELLEN: Whatever material he
uses, it is always trying to
mirror or find an expression for
the topic he tackles.
So there's a very connection
between topic and material.
>> KADER: The fact that I kept
these work fragile is very
important, it is an ephemeral
work.
>> In "Ghardaia", Kader would
continue his use of ephemeral
materials but in a more
political context.
The work juxtaposes a model of
the ancient North African city
of Ghardaia, made up of
couscous with an image of
Le Corbusier, the godfather of
modern Western architecture.
>> KADER: Ghardaia is a city in
Algeria that has been
influencing modernist
architecture through the eye of
Le Corbusier who was let's say
the first architect who really
get amazed by this incredible
11th century architecture made
of clay.
I think you have here definitely
what I would call the sort of,
colonization of the knowledge.
On one hand you have this
emerging new architecture in the
West that are part of this
Western superiority, if not
supremacy, you know?
But the legacy of this is
tradition, and not even Western
tradition.
>> IWONA: Corbusier, like his
modernist pals, didn't believe
really in retaining an existing
culture.
They wanted a tabula rasa and
they tended destroy what was
there.
Kader Attia repairs that.
He's again finding a way of
creating a rapprochement between
this idea of modernity, erasing
everything that went before it,
and bringing back the life and
the culture of what has always
been there.
>> KADER: I used couscous,
it's the main dish of North
African population since 3,000
years, as a cynical dish or
dinner in which posthumously
inviting Le Corbusier and
another architect to illustrate
this sort of amnesia we are
living in.
This has to be repaired.
>> Kader's interest in
repairing the relationship
between Western and non-Western
culture would reach a new level
of analysis in a powerful and
disturbing work he presented
at the dOCUMENTA (13)
exhibition in Germany.
>> The work was called "Repair
From Occident to
Extra-Occidental Cultures."
He had a system of shelves where
he put different things like
sculptures, found objects,
books and many other things to
kind of counter African and
European cultural traditions and
mix them together.
>> IWONA: What he did was to
juxtapose photographs and actual
busts of veterans of the First
World War who'd had the most
crude plastic surgery.
And these were shown alongside
African heads, where
scarification, the extension of
lower lips or earlobes, is a
cultural ritual, it's a kind of
fashion.
>> ELLEN: There was also a very
impressive slide projection,
with two slides next to each
other.
There were faces of soldiers
from the First World War.
For example, there was broken
cultural artifacts from Africa.
>> IWONA: So he's interested in
finding the continuities between
these things, bringing them
together and creating kind of
suture between them.
>> ELLEN: He takes repair as a
philosophical concept but also
as a social concept.
>> KADER: It was very important
for me to involve the audience
slowly into this complexity of
the repair by very simple
analogies.
So, analogies between an injured
faces and a broken object.
At the beginning, the repair of
the body was similar to repair
of any items.
But then you look at the images
and you discover that at the end
f the war, the repair of the
faces was almost perfect.
The West, when we break
something, we change it.
And if we do not change it,
we repair it and remove the
injury, it has to disappear.
In traditional society,
repairing means to give to the
object a new life, a new form,
but still keeping the trace of
the injury like a sign of the
time and the history of the
object.
>> CLEMENTINE: Every time a
person repairs an object, they
add to its history.
It sorts of shakes up
assumptions that objects last
only a brief period of time and
that we have to go and consume
more.
>> Colonization.
(Speaking French indistinctly)
>> French-Algerian artist
Kader Attia is currently based
in Berlin where his book lined
studio serves as a research
centre for many of his
projects.
>> We are here in my studio,
and it's not a big studio.
This place is not a brain.
I hope my brain is not that
messy, but it is actually a sort
of platform for work and
thinking and feeding my own
creative processes.
Goes from the arts, modern art,
the whole top is about surgery,
then colonization, architecture
definitely.
I have many object here, not
only books obviously, I have
some masks.
It represents this sort of brain
stroke from which you can wakeup
with your mouth like this and
your nose like this.
And I think this is extremely
interesting because we're either
representing the heinous,
so that probably invited in some
ritual to cool down the bad
spirit of this heinous so that
it doesn't-- it won't attack
the village.
Or it can be a celebration of a
sort of rarity.
Beauty basically means rarity,
but those people were rare,
so why we consider them as
monsters?
>> In 2016, Kader Attia was
awarded the Prix
Marcel-Duchamp, one of
France's most prestigious art
prizes, for a work dealing with
notions of repair, entitled
"Reflecting Memory."
>> CLEMENTINE: The exhibition
begins with a piece of matlouh
bread, baked by his mother, cut
in half and fixed to the wall.
And this bread is a symbolic
entrance into a series of works
that continue with a film of
45 minutes called Reflecting
Memory.
>> KADER: We started with a very
physical matter, what we call
the phantom limb.
The fact that some people who
have lost a leg or an arm, they
still feel this limb.
Some of them wake up during the
night and they feel--
(Gasping)
"It's back," and sadly, not.
>> CLEMENTINE: When you watch
the film, you realize that what
you think is a man or woman
standing there with all their
complete body, is effectively
the mirror reflection of
somebody who has lost a leg.
>> IWONA: They look at
themselves whole, reflected in
a mirror, doubling their leg or
their arm, and then the mirror
is taken away, and the
subconscious recognizes for the
first time the loss of a limb.
>> CLEMENTINE: It's a method
that is used to heal the
problem and the pain of the
phantom limb.
So he's interested in the
haunting that remains within our
consciousness.
>> IWONA: What is really
compelling about this film is
that rather than taking one
medical fact or psychological
state, he moves from these
sufferers if you like, to music,
to the Holocaust, to the
psychiatrist, and again he finds
ways of dissolving boundaries
and bringing all these different
thoughts of contemporary culture
together.
>> KADER: It became clear that
there was a metaphor between
the individual amputated body
and the social group.
What has happened for the
descendants of the Holocaust for
instance?
This generation of people who
have lived with the
disappearance of their
grandparents or parents.
It remain as a traumatic ghost,
a phantom limb haunting them.
As long as we deny this
(Unclear) process, could it be
cultural or physical, you get
confronted to repair.
What I'm showing here is the
phantom limb of cultural
complexes.
>> CLEMENTINE: The central
piece of the work after you've
seen the film, is 20 plinths
with sculptures, which in
the first instance you think
belong to so-called tribal art.
But when you look at them more
carefully you see immediately
that they are the packaging of
electronic equipment.
It's that immediate flash, the
fact that you can't stop
yourself from thinking that
you're looking at African masks
when you're actually looking at
something as banal as a piece
of packaging.
It evokes the phantom limb
within the history of art.
>> Recently, Kader has taken his
call for repair out of the
gallery and into the world by
opening a new space for art
and discussion in the
multiethnic neighbourhood
of Gare du Nord in Paris.
Consisting of a café,
bookstore, exhibition space,
and conference centre,
La Colonie aims to unite
thinkers, artists, activists
and members of the public to
help mend many of the problems
facing the modern world.
>> La Colonie is not only
criticizing the colonial
history, it's actually
criticizing the coloniality
of now, the colonization of
classes, the colonization of
gender, of the domination of one
part of population on the other.
>> CLEMENTINE: If you look at
the Colonie's logo, you'll see
it's crossed out.
So it isn't a colony in that
sense, it's an anti-colony as
well.
>> It's interesting that it
happens in Paris because of
course the history of artist run
spaces began in Paris.
(Speaking French)
>> IWONA: It's a space for his
neighbourhood, for those kids
who have nothing, and I think
that is a gesture.
It's something which I found
very powerful and moving, that
he wants to share the success
that he's had recently and
actually bring other people into
it.
>> ELLEN: Kader's work is doing
something that religion might
have done to people in earlier
ages.
It kind of touches you on a
level that you cannot really
grasp.
It shows you why art is
important.
>> Whatever subject he handles,
he does it because he's
interested in the relationship
between injury and repair.
And this makes his work into a
process of remediation.
>> IWONA: Kader Attia is an
artist who encompasses activism
but without didacticism.
He shows the way that cultures
can absorb pain, trauma,
destruction, and yet, still be
creative.
>> ELLIOT: I think he's an
artist very much concerned with
moral thought, and that's
what makes him important for me,
and that's something that
informs all of his work and I
wish there were more artists
like that.
>> KADER: As an artist, I could
spend my life doing aesthetics
and decorating the mind, but I
think there is a sort of moment
now, of emergency in terms of
the world we are living in now
and how it can be corrected,
how it can be repaired, for
better future.
I want to take care of that.
♪